                                              Sports-QA: A Large-Scale Video Question
                                               Answering Benchmark for Complex and
                                                        Professional Sports
                                          Haopeng Li1 , Andong Deng2 , Jun Liu3*, Hossein Rahmani3 ,
                                            Yulan Guo4 , Bernt Schiele5 , Mohammed Bennamoun6 ,
                                                                Qiuhong Ke7*
arXiv:2401.01505v5 [cs.CV] 5 Jan 2026




                                             1 School    of Computing and Information Systems, University of
                                                                          Melbourne.
                                        2 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida.
                                             3 School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University.
                                           4 School of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Sun Yat-sen

                                                                          University.
                                          5 Department of Computer Vision and Machine Learning, Max Planck

                                                   Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus.
                                              6 School of Physics, Maths and Computing, University of Western

                                                                           Australia.
                                                   7 Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University.




                                            *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): qiuhong.ke@monash.edu;


                                                                             Abstract
                                          Reasoning over sports videos for question answering is an important task with
                                          numerous applications, such as player training and information retrieval. How-
                                          ever, this task has not been explored due to the lack of relevant datasets and
                                          the challenging nature it presents. Most datasets for video question answering
                                          (VideoQA) focus mainly on general and coarse-grained understanding of daily-life
                                          videos, which is not applicable to sports scenarios requiring professional action
                                          understanding and fine-grained motion analysis. In this paper, we introduce the
                                          first dataset, named Sports-QA, specifically designed for the sports VideoQA
                                          task. The Sports-QA dataset includes various types of questions, such as descrip-
                                          tions, chronologies, causalities, and counterfactual conditions, covering multiple
                                          sports. Furthermore, to address the characteristics of the sports VideoQA task, we
                                          propose a new Auto-Focus Transformer (AFT) capable of automatically focusing


                                                                                  1
        on particular scales of temporal information for question answering. We con-
        duct extensive experiments on Sports-QA, including baseline studies and the
        evaluation of different methods. The results demonstrate that our AFT achieves
        state-of-the-art performance∗.

        Keywords: Video Question Answering, Sports Video, Benchmark, Auto-Focus
        Transformer




1 Introduction
Sports video analysis has been attracting increasing attention in recent years (Yuan
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Koshkina et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Martin et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2013). While research progress has been made on tasks
such as sports action recognition (Li et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Rasmussen et al.,
2022), reasoning over sports videos for question answering has not been explored.
As humans, we can not only recognize the actions of the players in sports videos
but also understand the effects of the players’ actions, explain why a team loses the
score, and imagine what would happen under counterfactual situations. Our impressive
capabilities in reasoning allow us to answer complex questions related to sports videos,
which is crucial in applications such as obtaining crucial statistics in matches for
player/team performance qualification, analyzing players’ actions and team strategies
for performance improvement, and efficiently retrieving information for audiences and
analysts. While sports video reasoning is clearly important, it is under-explored due
to challenges and the lack of datasets.
    In this paper, we tackle sports VideoQA, focusing on reasoning over sports videos
for question answering. This is distinct from general VideoQA, which centers on gen-
eral video understanding, mainly encompassing descriptive and temporal aspects (Jang
et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2019), as depicted in Fig.
1. Compared to general VideoQA, sports VideoQA is more challenging because the
questions may involve particular teams and professional actions, and it requires a fine-
grained understanding of actions and intra/inter-team relation modeling. As pointed
out in (Shao et al., 2020): 1) coarse-grained global video understanding is insufficient
for sports analysis where the actions are rapid and hard to differentiate; 2) the mod-
els pre-trained on coarse-grained datasets are not always beneficial to fine-grained
tasks. In the meantime, although significant strides have been made in the fine-grained
recognition of individual actions (Shao et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2017),
these datasets may fall short in effectively evaluating the ability for temporal and
causal reasoning over actions performed by individuals or teams in sports scenarios. A
large-scale dataset containing professional sports scenarios with detailed annotations
of sports-relevant questions is thus required for explicit and comprehensive reasoning
for sports VideoQA.
    To address this gap, we introduce a novel dataset called Sports-QA, the first
video QA dataset specifically focusing on sports activities. Leveraging sports videos

∗
    Sports-QA is available at: https://github.com/HopLee6/Sports-QA

                                              2
                                  2-point shot        2-point shot   2-point shot
               2-point shot




                                    Block              Block          Block


                                                 General VideoQA
          •   General Action Recognition: What is the man doing? (Jumping)
          •   Common Appearance Description: What color is the man wearing? (White)
          •   Simple Counting: How many people are in green? (Two)

                                                 Sports VideoQA
          •   Professional Action Recognition: What is the left team doing? (2-point shot)
          •   Action Reasoning: Does the right team successfully do “block”? (No)
          •   Counterfactual Condition: Would the left team win a point if the right team
              did not do “block”? (No)

Fig. 1 Illustrations of general VideoQA, which focus on common basic understanding, and sports
VideoQA, which requires professional action understanding and action relation reasoning1 .


and professional action labels from MultiSports (Li et al., 2021) and FineGym (Shao
et al., 2020), we construct our dataset. Both sources provide high-quality sports videos
with well-defined action labels, allowing us to annotate essential attributes for each
crucial action instance. Using these annotations, we generate QA pairs based on
pre-defined templates covering aspects such as description, chronology, causality, and
counterfactual conditions. The Sports-QA dataset is the first of its kind, comprising
approximately 94K QA pairs, encompassing multiple sports and various question types
for sports VideoQA. Table 1 provides a comparison between Sports-QA and several
widely-used VideoQA datasets.
    Compared with existing datasets, our Sports-QA provides new insights for
VideoQA: 1) It encompasses questions related to specific terms and actions in both
group activities (e.g., basketball) and single-person sports (e.g., gym). This requires
models to possess the capability to capture dynamic patterns and perform reason-
ing in scenarios with varying numbers of interactions for question answering. 2) To
achieve a comprehensive understanding of complex sports videos, Sports-QA includes
diverse questions that involve video information at various temporal granularities.
This encompasses global long-term temporal dependencies and fine-grained short-term
ones. For instance, a question asking about the number of actions requires the model
to capture global dependencies, while a question about the effect of a specific action
relies on short-term temporal information. Furthermore, Sports-QA has the potential
to be leveraged for other tasks. The pre-defined attributes of actions can be treated
as multiple labels, allowing the dataset to be used for multi-label classification tasks
for comprehensive action understanding. Additionally, based on the annotated action

  1
      We treat the action “block ” as a noun.



                                                        3
    Table 1 VideoQA datasets comparison. “Auto/Man” represents “automatic/manual”.
    “MC/OE” represents “multi-choice/open-ended”.

    Dataset                            Topic        #Video    #QA    Annotation   QA Task
    MSRVTT-QA (Xu et al., 2017)                        10K    244K     Auto         OE
    MSVD-QA (Xu et al., 2017)                           2K     51K     Auto         OE
                                      General
    NExT-QA (Xiao et al., 2021)                       5.4K     52K     Man        OE&MC
    TGIF-QA (Jang et al., 2017)                        72K    165K   Auto&Man     OE&MC
    SportQA (Xia et al., 2024)        Sports              0    70K   Auto&Man       MC
    SPORTU-text (Xia et al., 2024)    Sports              0   0.9K     Man          MC
    SPORTU-video (Xia et al., 2024)   Sports          1.7K     12K     Man          MC
    MovieQA (Tapaswi et al., 2016)    Movie             408    15K     Man          MC
    Social-IQ (Zadeh et al., 2019)    Social            1K      8K     Man          MC
    DramaQA (Choi et al., 2021)       Drama            24K     16K   Auto&Man       MC
    Sports-QA (Ours)                  Sports            6K     94K   Auto&Man       OE


attributes, we can modify the templates from question answering to declarative sen-
tences, generating descriptive or explanatory narrations and enabling comprehensive
sports video captioning.
    In addition to the dataset, we present a novel method for sports VideoQA. Recog-
nizing that sports VideoQA demands the model to capture information from multiple
frames at various temporal granularities, we introduce the Auto-Focus Transformer
(AFT), featuring an Auto-Focus Attention mechanism. Conceptually, the model oper-
ates akin to a temporal magnifying glass with a dynamic focal length, allowing it to
inspect the video to answer questions with diverse temporal dependencies. More specif-
ically, our designed Auto-Focus Attention dynamically selects attention focus based
on the question. This mechanism empowers the model to handle questions involving
video information across various time spans.
    The contributions are summarized as follows:
   • We contribute a large-scale dataset, which consists of various types of questions
      and multiple sports for VideoQA. To our knowledge, it is the first dataset for
      complex reasoning over professional sports actions.
   • We propose a new Auto-Focus Transformer (AFT), where the attention focus
      is adaptive based on the question, enabling the model to deal with questions
      requiring temporal information of various scales.
   • We conduct extensive experiments on our dataset, including baseline study, eval-
      uation of existing methods, and visualization of predictions. The results show the
      superiority of the proposed AFT for sports VideoQA.

2 Related Work
2.1 VideoQA Datasets
The development of VideoQA has been greatly facilitated by the emergence of var-
ious datasets, such as TGIF-QA (Jang et al., 2017), MSVD-QA, and MSRVTT-QA
(Xu et al., 2017), DramaQA (Choi et al., 2021), NExT-QA (Xiao et al., 2021), NExT-
OOD (Zhang et al., 2023). TGIF-QA, for instance, offers a comprehensive set of four


                                                4
sub-tasks designed for temporal reasoning in general videos and is widely recognized
in the VideoQA community. MSVD-QA and MSRVTT-QA are open-ended datasets
constructed from existing video captions, while DramaQA focuses on understand-
ing drama stories with hierarchical QAs and character-centered video annotation.
NExT-QA, introduced for describing and explaining temporal actions, provides both
multi-choice and open-ended questions through manual annotation. However, exist-
ing datasets center around general video understanding in daily scenarios or involve
coarse-grained action/event reasoning. Our contribution lies in fine-grained and
professional analysis within sports scenarios. We present Sports-QA, a
dataset that addresses aspects of description, chronology, causality, and
counterfactual conditions for multiple sports of diverse characteristics.

2.2 VideoQA Methods
VideoQA poses a significant challenge as it necessitates models to grasp both spa-
tial and temporal information from videos to answer questions. Various deep models
have been developed, approaching this task from different perspectives (Fan et al.,
2019; Jiang and Han, 2020; Li et al., 2022; Antol et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2018;
Xiao et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). For instance,
the deep heterogeneous graph alignment network by Jiang et al. (Jiang and Han,
2020) addresses VideoQA by simultaneously aligning intra/inter-modality informa-
tion. Another approach involves a multimodal attention model proposed by Fan et
al. (Fan et al., 2019), where heterogeneous memory learns global context from visual
features, and question memory captures the complex semantics of questions. IGV,
introduced by Li et al. (Li et al., 2022), grounds question-critical scenes in videos
by considering causal relations that remain invariant to complement contents. How-
ever, a limitation in these approaches is the lack of consideration for the fact that
different questions may require temporal dependencies of specific scales. In response
to this challenge, we propose the Auto-Focus Transformer, designed to
automatically focus on a specific temporal scale based on the question.

2.3 Sports Video/Text Understanding
Sports video/text understanding has drawn increasing attention in recent years (Yuan
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Koshkina et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Martin et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024; Wiseman et al., 2017). Researchers have
made great efforts in various tasks such as sports action recognition (Shao et al.,
2020), multi-person action detection (Li et al., 2021), and action quality assessment
(Tang et al., 2020). Meanwhile, numerous sports datasets are constructed (Parmar
and Morris, 2019; Li et al., 2021; Giancola et al., 2018; Deliege et al., 2021). AQA-7
(Parmar and Morris, 2019) is constructed for professional action quality assessment.
Seven types of actions are included in this dataset and all the action instances are
associated with quality scores. A large-scale dataset of basketball game descriptions
paired with detailed statistics is introduced by Wiseman et al. (2017), enabling fully
data-driven modeling approaches. MultiSports (Li et al., 2021) is proposed for the
spatial-temporal detection of professional sports actions. FineGym (Shao et al., 2020)


                                          5
    Table 2 The statistics for the MultiSports dataset are presented.

    Sports       # Action    # Instance    Avg. Action/Video Duration   # Bounding box
    Gym             21             8,703            1.5s   /   30.7s        325K
    Volleyball      12             7,645            0.7s   /   10.5s        139K
    Football        15            12,254            0.7s   /   22.6s        225K
    Basketball      18             9,099            0.9s   /   19.7s        213K
    Total           66            37,701            1.0s / 20.9s            902K



focuses on fine-grained activity localization that requires an accurate understanding of
the atomic level of a gymnastic action. Sports Intelligence (Yang et al., 2024) focuses
on comprehensive LLM evaluation in sports-related NLP tasks. While it covers diverse
textual scenarios, it does not address the multimodal or temporal complexities of
sports video QA. In contrast, our dataset is the first to specifically benchmark LLMs
in the context of professional sports video understanding, offering a new challenge for
multimodal reasoning.

2.4 Sports VideoQA
SportQA (Xia et al., 2024) presents over 70,000 multiple-choice questions to evaluate
sports knowledge in LLMs. However, it is purely text-based and lacks any video con-
tent. In contrast, our Sports-QA is a video-centric QA benchmark, targeting the unique
temporal and visual reasoning challenges present in sports. SPORTU (Xia et al., 2024)
introduces both text- and video-based QA. However, SPORTU-video consists of slow-
motion clips with generic QA focused on rule application and basic event recognition.
Our Sports-QA differs in three key ways: 1) It uses high-tempo professional sports
broadcasts, which are more fine-grained and realistic. 2) It introduces structured ques-
tion types aligned with video understanding (e.g., descriptive, chronological, causal,
and counterfactual reasoning). 3) It targets higher-level semantic reasoning grounded
in temporal dynamics, not just static recognition.

3 Sports-QA Dataset
3.1 Data Source
Regarding the collection of sports videos, we consider the following aspects: 1) The
visual quality of the video data should be high enough to conduct fine-grained video
understanding, such as video resolution and frame rate. 2) Instead of applying to a
single type of sports, we expect a VideoQA dataset involving multiple sports. After a
deep survey of the works on sports video understanding, we find that the MultiSports
(Li et al., 2021) and FineGym (Shao et al., 2020) datasets are highly suitable for our
purpose. The details of MultiSports and FineGym are as follows.
MultiSports (Li et al., 2021) is a dataset for the temporal localization of sports
actions, encompassing four sports (i.e., basketball, football, volleyball, and aerobic




                                              6
                                serve                                                          long ball

                                block                                                          shoot
                                              Volleyball                    Football
                            defend                                                             aerial duels
                                                (12)                          (15)
                            protect                                                            through ball

                                      ...                                                      ...
                                                             MultiSports
                                                                (66)                     push up
                                pass
                                drive                                                    leg circle
                                              Basketball                    Gym
                     3-point shot                                                        helicopter
                                                 (18)                       (21)
                           dribble                                                       explosive support

                                      ...                                                ...




                   split jump                                                                         1 turn to stand

               stag-ring jump                                                                        giant circle backward
                                            Balance Beam                   Uneven Bars
              split ring leap                                                                         giant circle backward
                                                (135)                         (133)
          cat leap with 1 turn                                                                        salto forward tucked

                             ...                                                                     ...
                                                              FineGym
        switch leap with 1 turn
                                                                (530)                                tsukahara piked

        split leap with 0.5 turn                                                                 handspring forward on, 1 turn oﬀ
                                            Floor Exercise                   Vault
             split leap forward                                                                  tsukahara stretched with 2 turn
                                                (111)                        (67)
               stag ring jump                                                                          tsukahara tucked

                                ...                                                             ...


Fig. 2 The action hierarchy of the MultiSports dataset is depicted at the top, while the FineGym
dataset’s hierarchy is shown at the bottom. It’s important to note that the figure includes only four
example actions for each sport.


gymnastics) and 66 fine-grained action categories2 . The action categories in Mul-
tiSports are professional terms (such as “volleyball spike”, “football tackle”, and
“basketball defensive rebound ”) instead of common and atomic actions like “run”
and “stand ”. For each action instance, the dataset provides the bounding boxes of a
player from the starting frame of an action to the ending frame, forming the action
spatial-temporal tube. The statistics of MultiSports are shown in Table 2.
FineGym (Shao et al., 2020) is a dataset designed to elevate the field of action
recognition by addressing the limitations observed in existing techniques3 . Developed
to surpass current benchmarks, it offers a unique combination of richness, quality, and
diversity in its content. This dataset is constructed on gymnasium videos, providing
a realistic and varied environment for action recognition studies. What sets FineGym
apart from other datasets is its meticulous temporal annotation at both action and
sub-action levels, featuring a three-level semantic hierarchy. This hierarchical structure
allows for a more nuanced understanding of activities, enabling researchers to explore
and analyze actions in finer detail. As an illustrative example, an event is annotated
as a sequence of elementary sub-actions Importantly, each sub-action within these sets
is further annotated with finely defined class labels, contributing to a higher level of
granularity in action recognition. Fig. 2 shows the action hierarchy of the MultiSports
and FineGym datasets.

  2
      Project homepage: https://deeperaction.github.io/datasets/multisports.html
  3
      Project homepage: https://sdolivia.github.io/FineGym



                                                                   7
   The action categories in MultiSports and FineGym are professional terms (such as
“volleyball spike”, “football tackle”, “basketball defensive rebound ”, and “vault Salto
backward tucked ”) instead of common and atomic actions (such as “run” and “stand ”).
Such professional labels are of great value to our dataset. Since the length of videos
varies greatly (from a few seconds to a few minutes), we segment the videos into clips
and generate QA pairs based on these clips.

3.2 Question-Answer Pair Generation
In most existing works, QA pairs are generated using two approaches: 1) Automatically
generating questions and answers based on video captions using a set of predefined
question templates (Jang et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021). This method
is efficient, but it may introduce obvious grammatical errors or lose crucial information
during the conversion of captions into questions and answers. 2) Manually annotating
questions and answers through crowdsourcing (Xiao et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2019; Gar-
cia et al., 2020). Although this approach produces QA pairs of high quality in terms
of accuracy and expression, manual annotation is time-consuming and expensive. In
this work, we aim to ensure the quality of the textual data while considering annota-
tion costs. We achieve this by generating QA pairs using pre-defined templates based
on existing labels and newly-labeled attributes of actions. Our approach guarantees
grammatically error-free QA pairs that capture crucial information in videos, thanks
to the careful design of sophisticated templates. Furthermore, as ball games and gym-
nastics have distinct characteristics, we generate the QA pairs in different ways as
described as follows.

3.2.1 QA Pair Generation for Ball Games
Specifically, for ball games, including basketball, football, and volleyball, we define
five attributes (Team, Outcome, Cause of Outcome, Cause of Action, and Effect of
Action) for actions. We then manually annotate the attributes of each action. The
definitions and annotation process of these attributes are elaborated as follows.
Attribute Definition. MultiSports consists of 45 action categories from ball games,
with some being crucial for professional sports statistics or quantifying the per-
formance of players/teams. For instance, the “2-Point Field Goal Percentage” in
a basketball match necessitates a fine-grained understanding of all “2-point shot”
actions, while the “saving” actions in football directly reflect the performance of goal-
keepers. In this work, we focus on 28 crucial actions, listed in Table 11. Considering
both practical applications and research purposes, we define five attributes for each of
the crucial action instances as follows.
1. Team: The team that the player of the action belongs to is denoted by two options:
left team or right team. Specifically, in basketball and football, the determination
of the left or right team depends on the team attacking towards the right or left. In
volleyball, the left or right team is designated based on their position relative to the
left or right side of the net.




                                           8
2. Outcome: This attribute assesses if the action meets the expectation and is defined
as a binary label: successful or failed. For example, if a “2-point shot” in basketball
scores a goal, it is annotated as successful; otherwise, it is labeled as failed.
3. Cause of Outcome:
    This attribute indicates the cause of failure for offensive actions, such as a “2-point
shot” in basketball, “shoot” in football, and “spike” in volleyball, or the cause of suc-
cess for defensive actions, like “block ” in football and “save” in volleyball. Specifically,
the cause of failure for offensive actions reflects player shortcomings. For example,
the failure of an offensive “long pass” in football could be attributed to defensive
interception, bad pass, or bad catch. Identifying the precise cause helps teams
identify their weaknesses and improve performance. Similarly, the cause of success for
defensive actions highlights player strengths. For instance, the success of a defensive
“save” in volleyball might be due to offensive out of bounds, offensive blocked
by net, or actually catch the ball, with the last case directly reflecting defen-
sive performance. We do not consider the cause of success for offensive actions or the
cause of failure for defensive actions, as they cannot be attributed to different cases.
For example, the failure of “football saving” can only be explained by the goalkeeper
missing the ball. Therefore, these causes are not worth discussing. We define various
cause options for applicable action categories and ask annotators to choose from them.
Note that this attribute is applicable to certain action categories, and the causes vary
for different action categories.
4. Cause of Action: This attribute indicates the actions that cause the current action.
Each action instance in a video is initially labeled with its time order, based on the
start time, which serves as the unique ID of the action in the video. For each crucial
action, annotators are asked to provide the IDs of the actions that cause the current
action; these causes are not necessarily crucial actions. Consequently, the Cause of
Action is a list consisting of the IDs of actions that are mostly temporally adjacent
to the current action. Not all crucial action categories are required to provide this
attribute because the causes of some actions are unique. For instance, the only cause
of “volleyball first pass” is “volleyball serve”.
5. Effect of Action: This attribute aims to identify the actions caused by the current
action, analogous to Cause of Action. Although the cause and effect are conjunctive,
we may consider only one of them, as some actions are not crucial. For instance, if
ACTION M (crucial action) causes ACTION N (non-crucial action), we only label
ACTION N as an effect of ACTION M.
Attribute Annotation. After defining the attributes mentioned above, we proceed to
annotate them for each crucial action instance in MultiSports. The annotation process
is divided into three stages: pre-annotation, formal annotation, and quality check.
In the pre-annotation stage, annotators are grouped into three categories, with each
group assigned responsibility for a specific type of ball game. Each annotator within a
group is then assigned several videos corresponding to their designated sport. During
this stage, annotators are tasked with labeling the attributes of the first 50 action
instances. Following this, an intra-group check is conducted to address any issues
related to understanding bias or potential mistakes, as well as to handle unexpected or
rare situations. The annotation can only progress to the next stage when annotators



                                             9
achieve a consistent understanding of each attribute, as outlined in the protocols.
Moving to the formal annotation stage, annotators use shared protocols to amend
their previous annotations and label the remaining action instances. Once all actions
are labeled, we perform an inter-group quality check on all annotations. The purpose
of this inter-group check is to ensure that the annotations align with the common
understanding of average individuals. The annotation process is completed within one
month and involves the collaboration of 15 graduate students.
    Based on the attributes, we generate questions about the videos by designing var-
ious templates (listed in the end of the paper) to inquire about these attributes.
For instance, given a video shown in Fig. 3, after annotating the attributes for the
action “spike”, a question querying a particular attribute (e.g., Outcome) of the
action can be generated, such as “Is the ‘spike’ of the right team successful? ”. Specif-
ically, our dataset involves four types of questions: descriptive, temporal, causal, and
counterfactual. The details of each type are described as follows.
1. Descriptive: Descriptive questions require holistic comprehension and involve vari-
ous aspects of information from the videos. These questions include simple queries such
as “What is the video about? ” and “Does SOME-TEAM perform SOME-ACTION? ”,
as well as complex ones involving counting and the outcome of actions, such as “How
many times does SOME-TEAM perform SOME-ACTION? ” and “Does SOME-TEAM
successfully do their i-th SOME-ACTION? ”
2. Temporal: Temporal questions focus on the temporal relations among the actions
of the same or different teams. Specifically, these questions require an understanding of
intra-group temporal relations and inter-group ones. Typical templates for this type of
question are “What does SOME-TEAM do before/after their i-th SOME-ACTION? ”
and “What does the left/right team do before/after the other team performs their i-th
SOME-ACTION? ”
3. Causal: Causal questions aim to uncover the causal relations among the action
instances and to explain the reasons or the specific process of the actions. Differ-
ent from temporal questions, these questions require causal reasoning based on visual
cues. The templates of these questions include causal queries such as “Why does
SOME-TEAM do the i-th SOME-ACTION? ” and “What is the effect of the i-th
SOME-ACTION of SOME-TEAM? ”, as well as explanation queries such as “How
does SOME-TEAM succeed in doing/fail to do the i-th SOME-ACTION? ”
4. Counterfactual: Different from the above three types of questions querying the
details that actually happen, counterfactual questions set hypothetical conditions that
do not occur in the video and query about the expected outcomes based on the con-
ditions. This type of question requires reasoning about various imagined situations
and expects the outcomes according to the causal relations among actions. The tem-
plate for this type of question is “Would the left/right team succeed in do the i-th
SOME-ACTION if the other team did not do SOME-ACTION? ”
From Attributes to Question-Answer Pairs. In particular, the questions are
queries about the attributes, and their answers can be obtained directly from our
annotations or through logical reasoning and statistical analysis over the annotations.
For instance, for a question asking about the cause of a specific action, the answer
can be easily retrieved from its attribute of cause; For a question asking whether a



                                           10
                                                                                     Defensive Rebound                                                                                             Defensive Rebound

                                                                                                                              3-Point shot
                                               Defensive Rebound




              2-Point Shot

    Attributes                       Questions & Answers                                                      Attributes                     Questions & Answers
    Team: Left                       Is the “2-point shot” of the left team successful? (No)                  Team: Left                     Is the “defensive rebound” of the left team successful? (Yes)
                                                                                                              Outcome: Successful            What does the right team do before the other team do “defensive rebound”?
    Outcome: Failed                  Why is the “2-point shot” of the left team failed? (Missed)                                             (3-point shot)
    Outcome Cause: Missed            What is the effect of the “2-point shot” of the left team?               Cause: 3-Point Shot            What is the cause of the “defensive rebound” of the left team?
    Effect: Defensive Rebound        (Defensive rebound)                                                                                     (3-point shot)




                                                                                                                              Dink




                  Spike                              Block                                                                                                     Block



    Attributes                           Questions & Answers                                                  Attributes                       Questions & Answers
    Team: Right                          Is the “spike” of the right team successful? (No)                    Team: Left                       Is the “dink” of the left team successful? (No)
    Outcome: Failed                      Does the right team succeed in doing “spike”? (No)                   Outcome: Failed                  Does the left team succeed in doing “dink”? (No)
    Outcome Cause: Out of Bounds         Why is the “spike” of the right team failed? (Out of bounds)         Outcome Cause: Blocked           Why is the “dink” of the left team failed? (Blocked)
    Effect: Block                        What is the effect of the “spike” of the right team? (Block)         Effect: Block                    What is the effect of the “dink” of the left team? (Block)




                                               Saving
              Shoot                                                                                                 Shoot                                  Saving




    Attributes                        Questions & Answers                                                     Attributes                       Questions & Answers
    Team: Right                       Does the right team succeed in doing “saving”? (Yes)                    Team: Left                       Is the “shoot” of the left team successful? (Yes)
    Outcome: Successful               What is the cause of the “saving” of the right team? (Shoot)            Outcome: Successful              Does the right team succeed in doing “saving”? (No)
    Outcome Cause: Out of Bounds      How does the right team succeed in doing “saving”?
                                                                                                              Effect: Saving                   What is the effect of the “shoot” of the left team? (Saving)
    Cause: Shoot                      (Out of bounds)

    Support                          Straight Jump                      Helicopter                            Horizontal Support                Turn                                 Pike Jump




    Questions & Answers                                                                                       Questions & Answers
    How many players are in the video? (Five)                                                                 How many players are in the video? (Five)
    What do the players perform before “straight jump”? (Support)                                             What do the players perform before “turn”? (Horizontal support)
    What do the players perform after “straight jump”? (Helicopter)                                           What do the players perform after “turn”? (Pike jump)
    Do the player perform “support” before “straight jump”? (Yes)                                             Do the player perform “pike jump” before “turn”? (No)


Fig. 3 Example of Sports-QA: The actions in the green boxes (such as “2-point shot”) are the
query actions, while the actions in the yellow boxes (such as “block ”) represent the effects. For ball
games, annotators provide attribute labels, and we generate QA pairs based on these attributes. In
gymnastics, we generate QA pairs using annotations from MultiSports/FineGym.


specific action is successful, we can check its outcome attribute. We guarantee the cor-
rectness of the answers as we have checked the annotations of attributes as mentioned
previously. These answers include responses like “yes/no”, numerical values, sports
names (such as “volleyball ”), action categories in MultiSports and FineGym (such as
“block ”), and short phrases describing the reasons (such as “out of bounds”). See Fig.
3 for more concrete examples of the attributes and the generated QA pairs.
    An interesting aspect of our dataset is that it can be utilized for other tasks due to
our two-stage annotation process. Specifically, we have defined several attributes for
each action instance, which can be considered as multiple labels. Consequently, our
dataset can be employed for conducting multi-label classification. Moreover, by alter-
ing the template from question answering to declarative sentences, we can generate


                                                                                                         11
descriptive or explanatory narrations for sports videos. Hence, our dataset can also be
exploited for sports video captioning.

3.2.2 QA Pair Generation for Gymnastics
A major difference between aerobic gymnastics/FineGym and ball games is the
absence of the concept of a team. Furthermore, there are no causal relations among
the actions performed in these sports. Therefore, we only generate descriptive and
temporal questions for aerobic gymnastics/FineGym based on their annotations. In
addition to the templates used for ball games, we have also designed some new tem-
plates. For descriptive questions, we include queries about the number of players or
actions, such as “How many actions does the player perform? ” and “How many times
does the player perform SOME-ACTION? ” For temporal questions, we add counting
questions like “How many times do the players do SOME-ACTION before SOME-
ACTION? ” Such a QA design leverages the fine-grained features in the datasets and
constitutes challenging temporal reasoning that forces the models to focus on the
salient sub-actions in the whole gymnastic event.

3.3 Diversity, Debiasing and Problem Setting
Diversity of Questions. The limited diversity in generating questions using pre-
designed templates may not significantly impact the significance of datasets for several
reasons. First, in the context of sports, there is a high level of restriction imposed by
rules and specific content, resulting in a more focused attention from the audience
on particular actions and events. This inherent structure in sports content narrows
down the range of potential questions, making template-based question generation
a feasible approach. Secondly, the practice of template-based question generation is
widely accepted and employed in the construction of VideoQA datasets (Jang et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021). The adoption of this approach in reputable
datasets attests to its effectiveness and acceptance. Therefore, while the questions are
template-based, their relevance and significance in the context of sports are preserved,
ensuring the robustness of the dataset for analysis and evaluation.
Debiasing. Unlike daily scenarios, players in sports are highly restricted by rules. For
instance, after the left team executes a “volleyball serve”, the right team must follow
with a “first-pass”. This results in highly correlated actions in the videos, leading to
questions and answers that are also highly correlated in our generated pairs. However,
such questions are often meaningless for VideoQA, as the answers can be easily inferred
through rules or common sense and should be removed. To address this, we first
obtain meta-questions by removing team information and the order of actions from
the original questions. For example, the meta-question for “What does the left team do
after the other team does the second spike? ” becomes “What does the team do after the
other team does spike? ” We then examine the correlations between the meta-questions
and their answers. If there is only one answer to the meta-question, we remove the
corresponding QA pairs. If an answer to a meta-question occurs more frequently than
other answers (frequency larger than 0.5), we randomly remove the corresponding QA
pairs to balance the frequencies, ensuring they are all lower than 0.5.


                                           12
Problem Setting. Following the approach in (Jang et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2017), we
define an open-ended task based on the generated QA pairs. It is important to note
that the open-ended setting, along with the multiple-choice setting, is widely used in
the field of VideoQA. We have chosen to commit to the open-ended task instead of
the multiple-choice one for two reasons: 1) The open-ended task is more challenging
as it requires models to choose from a large answer set rather than selecting from
several given options. 2) Limiting the answer choices to only several options would
significantly decrease the diversity of the dataset. Specifically, all answers in the QA
pairs form an answer pool, which is treated as 191 classes (after discarding classes
with fewer than 30 samples).
Interest of Different Participants. We would like to emphasize that the questions
in our dataset are intentionally designed to reflect the information needs of different
participants, including audience members, commentators, referees, and coaches. For
example, we include questions about the outcomes of basketball shots and football
attempts, which are typically of interest to both the audience and commentators. We
also design questions about the causes or intentions behind specific actions, which can
assist coaches in training and instruction. In addition, we include questions related to
counting technical movements in gymnastics, which are relevant to referees for scoring
purposes. In summary, the question design is grounded in the real interests of these
different participants.
Why not Fine-Grained Action Recognition? It is essential to underscore that
merely achieving fine-grained action recognition is insufficient for Sports-QA. The
nature of the questions in this context demands not only precise detection of actions
but also involves intricate temporal and causal modeling. To illustrate, questions
that inquire about the effects of certain actions necessitate the accurate identifica-
tion of temporally adjacent actions and a nuanced understanding of their causality. In
summary, Sports-QA requires a more advanced level of comprehension and temporal
reasoning beyond basic action recognition.

3.4 Dataset Statistics
Table 3 presents the numbers of QA pairs for various question types and different
sports in Sport-QA. Our dataset comprises approximately 94K QA pairs. It’s worth
noting that a substantial portion of our descriptive questions involves complex action
temporal localization and counting, presenting challenges similar to other question
types. Additionally, we have balanced the number of questions across different sports.
    The total number of videos in our dataset is 5,967, distributed across different
sports as follows: basketball (879), football (1,030), volleyball (586), gym (505), vault
(501), uneven bars (834), floor exercise (770), and balance beam (862). Sports-QA is
divided into training, validation, and testing sets (60%/20%/20%). Specifically, videos
of the same sport are randomly assigned to each set to ensure similar distributions
of sport types across subsets. Additionally, we have ensured that the distributions of
answer classes are similar in different subsets.
    Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of answer classes broken down by question types
in Sports-QA. Note that we only showcase the first 80 classes with more examples. As
depicted in the figure, the distribution of answers is long-tailed, and the unbalanced


                                           13
                                     Table 3 The numbers of QA pairs for different types and different sports.

                                     Sports                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Descriptive                                                                                                                                                                                                      Temporal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Causal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Counterfactual                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total
                                     Basketball                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5,629                                                                                                                                                 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            785                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   278                                                                                                                                           6,714
                                     Football                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6,659                                                                                                                                              1,355                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1,949                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   523                                                                                                                                          10,486
                                     Volleyball                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6,120                                                                                                                                                360                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1,942                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   685                                                                                                                                           9,107
                                     Gym                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6,382                                                                                                                                              1,997                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                           8,379
                                     Floor Exercise                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6,046                                                                                                                                             11,012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                          19,418
                                     Balance Beam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7,477                                                                                                                                             12,773                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                          20,250
                                     Uneven Bars                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7,294                                                                                                                                             12,124                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                          17,058
                                     Vault                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2,661                                                                                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                           2,661
                                     Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          48,268                                                                                                                                                  39,643                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4,676                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1,486                                                                                                                                                                                    94,073



14000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Counterfactual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Causal
12000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Temporal
10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Descriptive
8000

6000

4000

2000

   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  switch leap (leap forward with leg…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                salto backward stretched-step out (feet…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       giant circle backward with 0.5 turn to…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pike sole circle backward with 1 turn…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wolf hop or jump (hip angle at 45,…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        salto sideward tucked, take off from…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                switch leap (leap forward with leg…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sissone (leg separation 180 degree on…
                                                                                                                              flic-flac with step-out, also with…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               free aerial walkover forward, landing…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (swing backward or front support)…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (swing forward) double salto backward…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  free aerial cartwheel landing in cross…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 turn on one leg, free leg optional…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               salto backward stretched with legs…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     double salto backward tucked with 1…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (swing backward) salto forward piked…
             yes




                                     transition flight from low bar to high bar




                                                                                                                                                                    transition flight from high bar to low bar
                           fb
                                bb




                                                                                                 vb
                                                                                                      giant circle backward




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 split jump




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       split leap with 1 turn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        double salto backward piked




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              stalder backward to handstand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        salto backward tucked




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          gym bent leg jump
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fb long pass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             salto forward stretched with 1 twist


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         salto forward tucked to cross stand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gym straddle jump




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  salto forward tucked



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vb defend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bb 2-point shot




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fb through pass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  round-off




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           vault




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 salto backward stretched with 1.5 twist




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    salto backward stretched with 2.5 twist


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bb 3-point shot




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       salto backward stretched with 3 twist
        no


                   1
                       2




                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fb shoot



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                counter straddle over high bar to hang




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fb saving



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      flic-flac to land on both feet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fb intercept
                                                                                      vb spike




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gym


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                balance beam


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    uneven bar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             floor exercise




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              right team
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           left team




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fb tackle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              switch leap to ring position
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pike sole circle backward to handstand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      switch leap with 0.5 turn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fb cross




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   double salto backward tucked




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         vb saved




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vb dink




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vb blocked




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fb block
Fig. 4 The distributions of answer classes broken down by question types.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Table 4 Statistics regarding the temporal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and spatial characteristics in Sports-QA.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Before                                                                                                                                                                After                                                                                                                                                                                         Other                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Left                                                                                                                                                                893                                                                                                                                                 584                                                                                                                                                                                                           7,382                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8,859
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Right                                                                                                                                                               146                                                                                                                                                 114                                                                                                                                                                                                           7,832                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8,092
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Other                                                                                                                                                            19,147                                                                                                                                              18,809                                                                                                                                                                                                          39,166                                                                                                                                                                                                                             77,122
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sum                                                                                                                                                              20,186                                                                                                                                              19,507                                                                                                                                                                                                          54,380                                                                                                                                                                                                                             94,073


nature adds to the challenge of our dataset. Meanwhile, classes of the same type, such
as “yes/no”, are balanced. This further increases the difficulty of our dataset, as the
models are required to examine the video for answering the question instead of merely
guessing the answer based on the question type.
    Additionally, we detail the statistics regarding the temporal and spatial character-
istics of each question in Table 4. Specifically, we analyzed each question along two
key dimensions: whether it contains spatial directional terms (e.g., “left”/“right”) and
whether it includes temporal relational terms (e.g., “before”/“after”). As illustrated
in the table, the distribution of questions is balanced with respect to both spatial and
temporal attributes, indicating no inherent bias in these aspects.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                    RoIAlign
                                       +
                                     Linear                    Auto-Focus                Answer
       Video                I3D
                                                               Transformer              Prediction

   Object Detection                               Linear+softmax

                                                               Transformer             Transformer
   Question       LSTM / Transformer                             Decoder                 Encoder

Fig. 5 The structure of the sports VideoQA model based on the proposed Auto-Focus Transformer.


4 Auto-Focus Transformer for Sports Video
  Question Answering
A defining challenge in sports VideoQA is the need to reason over temporal depen-
dencies of diverse scales involving multiple objects. For instance, a question asking
about the number of actions requires the model to capture global dependencies in the
video, whereas a question querying the effect of an action relies on short-term tem-
poral information. The scale of temporal dependency required varies based on the
question. However, current Transformer-based or GNN-based VideoQA methods tend
to focus on global dependencies, irrespective of the required scale of temporal infor-
mation. To address this limitation, we propose the Auto-Focus Transformer (AFT), a
new Transformer encoder featuring a novel multi-head Auto-Focus Attention (AFA)
mechanism, designed specifically for sports VideoQA.
    Specifically, we start by extracting the appearance feature and motion feature of
the frame using pretrained ResNet (He et al., 2016) and I3D (Carreira and Zisserman,
2017) (refer to Section 5.1 for more details). Subsequently, we concatenate these fea-
tures and input them into a linear layer for dimension reduction and feature fusion.
Consequently, for each video, we obtain a sequence of frame representations (R).
Regarding the question, we utilize a bi-directional RNN or Transformer to obtain the
text representations, encompassing both the global one (w) and the local ones (W ).
    We then capture the dependencies among frames using AFT where the AFA mech-
anism is computed as follows (the multi-head AFA is defined likewise): given the key
set {ki }, the value set {vi }, and a query qj (qj , ki , vi ∈ Rd are mapped from R in
AFA, and d is the hidden dimension),
                                                                            !
                                   X           X                   qjT ki
                      AFA(qj ) =          αf           softmaxi     √           vi ,                 (1)
                                   f ∈F
                                                                       d
                                               i∈Djf


where F is a set of pre-defined focal lengths. Djf = {i||i − j| ≤ f } is the index set
of the neighbours ofPqj within focal length f . αf ∈ (0, 1) is the dynamic weight of
focus f , satisfying f αf = 1 and depended on the question. As shown in Fig. 5,




                                                 15
           |F |
α = {αf }f =1 are obtained by applying linear projection4 and softmax to the global
representation of question. Since the required scale of temporal dependency is inher-
ently question-dependent, our AFA is designed to selectively focus on only the relevant
scale(s) dictated by the question. This targeted modeling ensures the model priori-
tizes crucial information and filters out irrelevant temporal cues, thereby enhancing
the accuracy of predictions.
    We denote the output of AFT as M .
    For the video-text integration, we draw inspiration from (Li et al., 2022) and (Jiang
and Han, 2020), employing a graph convolutional network (GCN) and block fusion
(Ben-Younes et al., 2019). Refer to (Li et al., 2022) for detailed information. Ultimately,
we obtain a fused feature s and predict the answer using a linear projection.

5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Settings
We start by explaining the experimental settings, covering data pre-processing and
feature extraction, implementation details, and the evaluation metrics.
Pre-processing and Representation. The videos in our dataset are down-sampled
to 5 FPS to reduce temporal redundancy. We extract two types of visual features
for experiments: appearance feature and motion feature. For each feature type, we
obtain both global and local features. Specifically, we detect 10 objects in every two
frames of each video using Faster-RCNN (Ren et al., 2015) (with ResNet-101 (He
et al., 2016) as the backbone and a score threshold set to 0.6), pretrained on COCO
(Lin et al., 2014). These detected objects serve as local appearance features in our
work. Additionally, we use the global average pooling of Res4 activation in Faster-
RCNN as the global appearance feature. To extract motion features, we employ I3D
(Carreira and Zisserman, 2017) pretrained on Kinetics (Carreira and Zisserman, 2017).
Specifically, for each frame, we combine it with its adjacent 7 frames, creating a clip
that we then feed to I3D to extract a 3D feature map. The global motion feature of
a frame is obtained by applying global average pooling to the 3D feature. The local
motion feature of an object in a frame is obtained by applying RoIAlign (He et al.,
2017) (output size 1 × 1) to the 3D feature with its corresponding bounding box. Note
that our method uses only the global feature. For language, we explore two types
of word embeddings: GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) and pre-trained BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018).
Implementation Details. We set the attention focus to F = {3, 9, 80} to cover short-
term, mid-term, and long-term dependencies, respectively. The hidden dimension d is
set to 512. The loss function is cross-entropy. The models are trained for 50 epochs
with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and a batch size of 16, using the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba, 2014).
Evaluation Metrics. For evaluation metrics, since we structure the task as a
multi-class classification problem, we employ the accuracy of multi-class classifica-
tion to showcase the models’ performance on our dataset. Additionally, recognizing

  4
    We also explored a more complex alternative structure—a two-layer MLP—and found that it yields
results comparable to those of the linear projection.


                                               16
    Table 5 Baseline results on Sports-QA, including random choosing, semantic-aware (S-A)
    random choosing, semantic-aware (S-A) most-frequent-answer choosing, LSTM-based
    BlindQA, and Transformer-based BlindQA. The best and the second-best results (%) are
    bold and underlined.

                                                  Baseline                                            GloVe                          BERT
     Metric
                       Random           S-A Random                   S-A Frequent              LSTM              Trans.        LSTM              Trans.
    Accuracy                  0.5               24.6                        26.8                44.0              43.7             43.9           43.9
    F1-score                  0.3                5.4                        5.7                 13.5              14.9             13.8           15.8


Table 6 The results of different methods on Sports-QA. The sport-wise accuracy,
question-type-wise accuracy, overall accuracy and F1-score are presented (%). The best and second
best results are bold and underlined.
                                                           Sports                              Question Type
Word Emb.   Model                                                                                                           Acc.          F1-score
                                        Basket.    Foot.   Volley.   Gym    FineG.    Desc.   Temp.   Causal     Counter.
            BlindQA                      33.4      62.9     44.9     36.5    42.0     51.7     32.7    48.7        51.3     43.7          14.9
            CoMem (Gao et al., 2018)     72.8      63.1     69.8     70.0    50.3     77.0     32.9    50.0        60.9     57.1          23.1
            HME (Fan et al., 2019)       64.8      63.3     68.5     71.6    49.3     76.5     31.2    50.4        54.3     56.0          23.6
            HGA (Jiang and Han, 2020)    71.3      65.4     72.2     72.2    51.3     78.1     34.4    52.0        59.2     58.3          24.5
  GloVe     HQGA (Xiao et al., 2022)     72.8      64.6     70.5     71.6    51.0     77.6     33.8    54.0        58.2     57.9          25.0
            IGV (Li et al., 2022)        68.8      66.0     70.6     72.4    52.1     78.2     34.7    52.1        59.2     58.5          24.8
            MASN (Seo et al., 2021)      71.2      64.2     70.1     66.9    50.5     76.4     33.6    50.2        58.9     57.0          23.4
            Baseline (Ours)              69.5      65.4     68.9     71.8    52.3     77.8    35.0        52.4     59.9     58.0          23.7
            AFT (Ours)                   73.9      67.8     69.5     71.8    52.5     78.9    35.3        55.1     56.3     59.2 (+1.2)   25.6 (+1.9)
            BlindQA                      34.7      52.1     45.9     38.3    43.9     51.8    33.3        48.0     53.9     43.9          15.8
            CoMem (Gao et al., 2018)     74.1      64.0     68.7     70.7    49.3     77.2    32.1        48.4     55.6     56.6          26.4
            HME (Fan et al., 2019)       64.7      63.4     66.2     70.6    49.3     76.6    30.7        46.6     53.6     55.6          22.9
            HGA (Jiang and Han, 2020)    71.6      66.5     69.6     70.7    51.3     78.0    33.8        54.3     56.6     58.1          25.1
  BERT      HQGA (Xiao et al., 2022)     74.1      63.5     67.2     70.8    50.3     76.6    33.6        49.1     57.9     57.0          25.0
            IGV (Li et al., 2022)        72.0      63.9     70.4     72.4    51.7     78.0    34.2        51.9     63.2     58.2          23.8
            MASN (Seo et al., 2021)      73.0      63.0     69.7     66.6    50.1     76.4    32.5        50.6     61.2     56.6          24.1
            Baseline (Ours)              70.7      66.6     69.2     71.5    51.8     78.0    34.8        50.5     60.2     57.9          23.9
            AFT (Ours)                   72.3      67.9     70.4     71.6    52.4     78.3    35.5        56.8     58.2     59.1 (+1.2)   25.4 (+1.5)




            Table 7 The visual features used by different models. A./M./G./L. represents
            Appearance/Motion/Global/Local. Mem, IG, HL, and GNN stand for Memory,
            Invariant Grounding, Hierarchical Learning, and Graph Neural Network,
            respectively.

            Model                                               Venue               Insight       G.A            G.M.        L.A.         L.M.
            CoMem (Gao et al., 2018)                         CVPR’18                 Mem              ✓           ✓
            HME (Fan et al., 2019)                           CVPR’19                 Mem              ✓           ✓
            HGA (Jiang and Han, 2020)                        AAAI’20                 GNN              ✓           ✓
            IGV (Li et al., 2022)                            CVPR’22                  IG              ✓           ✓
            HQGA (Xiao et al., 2022)                         AAAI’22                  HL              ✓           ✓            ✓
            MASN (Seo et al., 2021)                           ACL’21                 GNN              ✓           ✓            ✓           ✓
            AFT (Ours)                                                               AFA              ✓           ✓



the long-tail distribution of our dataset, we evaluate methods using F1-score. F1-
score is particularly important for sports VideoQA as it explicitly reflects performance
averaged over imbalanced classes.




                                                                            17
5.2 Baseline Study
Several baselines are constructed to evaluate their performance on our Sports-QA
dataset as follows.
Random Choosing: Answers are randomly selected from the 191 answer classes,
                                               1
resulting in an accuracy of approximately 191     ≈ 0.5%. The F1-score is obtained by
running the random test for 200 times and taking the average.
Semantic-Aware Random Choosing: The randomly selected answer is constrained
by the question type. For example, binary questions (beginning with “Do” or “Is”)
can only choose from “yes” or “no”; questions asking about the number of something
(beginning with “How many”) can only choose a number.
Semantic-Aware Most-Frequent-Answer Choosing: Like the Semantic-Aware
(S-A) Random Choosing strategy, this approach operates within the constraint of
question type. The key distinction lies in its selection criterion: instead of random
sampling, it prioritizes the most frequently occurring answer within each question type.
BlindQA: Models are constructed with a question encoder and an MLP-based answer
decoder, without exploiting visual information. Two types of word embeddings (Glove
and pre-trained BERT) and two question encoders (LSTM and Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017)5 ) are studied.
    The results of the baselines are shown in Table 5. Random choosing exhibits
poor accuracy and F1-score, but considering constraints from the questions sig-
nificantly improves performance. The semantic-aware most-frequent-answer strategy
yields modest improvements in both accuracy and F1-score. Importantly, however,
these performance metrics remain relatively low. This evidence strongly indicates that
answer bias in our dataset is well-controlled, as even strategies explicitly leveraging
frequency patterns within question types fail to achieve artificially inflated perfor-
mance. This finding reinforces the robustness of our dataset design, ensuring that
model performance reflects genuine understanding rather than reliance on spurious
answer distributions. BlindQA achieves considerable results in both accuracy and F1-
score, indicating noticeable semantic correlations between questions and answers. By
maximizing the likelihood of the answer conditioned on a specific question type, the
model fits the answer distribution given different questions in the training set.
    Regarding word embedding, pre-trained BERT achieves slightly better accuracy
than GloVe, with noticeable improvements in F1-score. Concerning different question
encoders, Transformer and LSTM achieve similar accuracy, but Transformer outper-
forms LSTM in F1-score. In summary, word embedding has a greater impact on
performance than the question encoder.

5.3 Benchmark on Sports-QA
We benchmark several VideoQA methods on our Sports-QA dataset, comparing them
to CoMem (Gao et al., 2018), HME (Fan et al., 2019), HGA (Jiang and Han, 2020),
MASN (Seo et al., 2021), HQGA (Xiao et al., 2022), and IGV (Li et al., 2022), with

   5
     We also experimented with BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and DeBERTa (He
et al., 2021), as the encoder for the question encoder. However, the improvement brought by them over the
baselines was marginal. Considering the balance between accuracy and model complexity, we decided not
to include them in our final framework.



                                                   18
HQGA (Xiao et al., 2022) and IGV (Li et al., 2022) representing the state of the art. It’s
worth noting that we only evaluate methods without large-scale video-text pretraining,
excluding pretrained models like MERLOT (Zellers et al., 2021), VIOLET (Fu et al.,
2021), and All-in-one (Wang et al., 2022). The exclusion is based on the following
reasons: 1) pretrained models require large-scale additional data, making comparisons
unfair for methods without pretraining; 2) we aim to highlight the characteristics of
our dataset, and the universal knowledge gained by pretrained models could introduce
bias in understanding sports scenarios. Table 7 shows the types of visual features used
by each model, along with a summary of each method’s insights. For CoMem, HME,
and HGA, we use re-implementations provided by (Xiao et al., 2021), and for MASN,
HQGA, and IGV, we utilize the official implementations by their respective authors.
The baseline model has the same architecture as shown in Fig. 5, with AFT
replaced with a standard Transformer Encoder.
    In Table 6, the VideoQA methods demonstrate substantial improvements com-
pared to BlindQA. Notably, the most significant improvements are observed for
basketball (approximately 40% increase in accuracy), indicating the critical role of
visual information in basketball for question answering. Conversely, the improvements
for football are less pronounced (about 4%), suggesting that BlindQA already achieves
considerable accuracy in this sport. The results suggest high correlations between ques-
tions and answers in football, posing challenges for VideoQA models to fully exploit
visual information, potentially due to the complexity introduced by more players.
    Examining different question types, the greatest improvements are observed for
descriptive questions (around 27% increase in accuracy). Additionally, VideoQA per-
formance on causality and counterfactual questions shows significant improvements
compared to BlindQA. However, results for temporal questions are similar between
VideoQA methods and BlindQA (except for our AFT), suggesting that VideoQA
models may struggle with modeling fine-grained temporal dependencies among actions.
    Among the different VideoQA models, our AFT achieves the best performance
in both accuracy and F1-score. The significant improvements compared to the base-
line indicate the effectiveness of the proposed attention mechanism in distinguishing
semantically similar classes.

5.4 Further Analysis
Generalization Ability across Sports. In this study, our primary objective is to
assess the generalization capabilities across different sports domains. Our approach
involves an initial pretraining phase on a set of four sports, followed by fine-tuning on
a fifth, distinct sport. We meticulously evaluate the performance of this pretraining-
fine-tuning methodology in comparison to training a model entirely from scratch. The
outcomes, detailed in Table 8, showcase a notable enhancement in accuracy when
employing the pretraining strategy on diverse sports. These findings suggest that the
model acquires a nuanced understanding of common semantic features during the ini-
tial pretraining. Moreover, the model demonstrates its ability to effectively generalize
this acquired knowledge to previously unseen sports during the fine-tuning phase.
Impact of Focal Length. In this experiment, we investigate the impact of different
focal lengths and their combinations on the validation set. For short-term dependency,


                                           19
             Table 8 The table presents comparisons (accuracy %) between
             models trained from scratch for individual sports and those fine-tuned
             using data from other sports, along with the corresponding
             improvements (Imp.).

              Pretraining     Basketball    Football       Volleyball        Gym         FineG.
                   ✗               57.1         55.0         56.4            70.2         48.5
                   ✓               58.3         56.5         57.7            71.7         50.3
                 Imp.              +1.2         +1.5         +1.3            +1.5        +1.8



                   Table 9 The accuracy (%) of various focal lengths and
                   their combinations on the validation set. Note that the
                   combination of the same focal length implies the use of
                   only one focal length.

                             1        3     5          7      9         11          80
                       1    58.0     /      /      58.8     59.1        58.8    58.3
                       3     /      58.6    /      59.2     59.3        58.3    58.6
                       5     /       /     58.3    59.0     58.7        58.8    58.9
                       7     /        /     /      58.4       /          /      58.8
                       9     /        /     /       /        59.0        /      59.2
                       11    /        /     /       /         /         58.2    58.8
                       80    /        /     /          /      /          /      58.2


we consider lengths of 1, 3, and 5. For the mid-term, we explore lengths of 7, 9, and 11.
Regarding long-term (global) dependency, we set the focal length to the video length,
which is 80 seconds. The results are presented in Table 9. From the results, it is evident
that the model with global attention performs less effectively compared to those with
local attention. However, upon applying our auto-focus attention mechanism, there is
a significant improvement in performance. Notably, the combination of focal lengths
3 and 9 achieves the highest accuracy. In our final model, we incorporate the global
focus, resulting in the best accuracy at 59.2%.
Performance of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Following
the setup outlined in (Yang et al., 2024), we evaluated the zero-shot performance
of various multimodal large language models (MLLMs) on our dataset. The corre-
sponding results from (Yang et al., 2024) are presented in Table 10. As shown in the
table, the lower scores reveal that MLLMs still have substantial scope for advancement
in video-based sports recognition. This outcome underscores that video-based sports
understanding remains a notable challenge for MLLMs, emphasizing the intricate
nature of multimodal sports comprehension tasks. Since video-based sports recognition
is primarily rooted in identifying specific sports and their associated actions, MLLMs
require targeted enhancements in this domain to improve performance. We also observe
that the CoT (Chain-of-Thought) variants of MiniGPT and ChatUniVi perform worse
than their original baselines. This degradation likely arises because these models were
not pretrained to generate explicit reasoning steps, and introducing CoT changes the
expected output distribution from concise answers to verbose reasoning chains. The


                                                  20
Table 10 The accuracy (%) of different MLLMs (zero-shot or finetuning setting) on Sports-QA.

Model                                        Desc.    Temp.     Causal    Counter.     Acc.
Minigpt-4-7B (Zhu et al., 2023)               36.85    14.10     23.20       36.51     26.70
Minigpt-4-7B (CoT)                            36.38    14.15     19.79       34.54     26.26
Chat-UniVi-7B (Jin et al., 2024)              45.31    16.23     24.23        6.58     31.52
Chat-UniVi-7B (CoT)                           45.04    14.71     23.09       13.82     30.81
Video-LLaVA-7B (Zhu et al., 2023)             42.80    13.52     36.80       42.76     30.33
Video-LLaVA-7B (CoT)                          43.46    13.50     35.57       39.47     30.55
LLaVA-Video-Qwen2-7B (Zhang et al., 2024)     45.77    15.94     37.73       41.78     32.73
Qwen2.5-7B (Bai et al., 2025)                 46.57    16.43     38.41       42.87     33.40
Qwen2.5-3B                                    37.81    15.45     25.61       37.57     27.77
Qwen2.5-3B-FT                                 81.71    42.63     58.11       58.97     63.71


additional reasoning text often introduces noise or hallucinated visual details, which
can propagate errors to the final prediction. Moreover, since our benchmark assess
only short final answers, the longer CoT outputs may be penalized. To further assess
the difficulty of Sports-QA, we fine-tuned an advanced multi-modal LLM, Qwen2.5-
VL-3B (Bai et al., 2025), on our dataset. As shown, the zero-shot model performs
poorly due to the large domain gap, while fine-tuning leads to a substantial accuracy
improvement, reaching 63.71%. Despite this improvement, the fine-tuned model still
leaves considerable room for further progress, highlighting the challenging nature of
our benchmark.

5.5 Visualization
Qualitative Results. Fig. 6 illustrates predictions from various methods. In some
instances, BlindQA successfully guesses the correct answer by leveraging the correla-
tion between the question and the answer in the training set. However, this approach
is not foolproof, as the blinded model consistently selects the most correlated answer
to the question. In comparison, the VideoQA models struggle to discern subtle dif-
ferences between semantically or visually similar answer classes. For example, actions
like “long pass” and “cross” both involve passing the ball to other players but differ
in passing direction and distance, presenting challenges for accurate distinction. Addi-
tionally, the compared VideoQA models exhibit limitations in fine-grained motion
analysis, such as action counting, as evident in the last example. With its ability to
capture various types of temporal dependencies, our AFT outperforms the compared
models on these challenging samples.
Focus Weight. Fig. 7 depicts the focus weights of selected questions. Notably, ques-
tions seeking information about specific actions (e.g., “win a point”) heavily rely
on short-term information (foccal length 3). In contrast, questions like “How many
times does the right team do ‘block’ ? ” necessitate a stronger emphasis on long-term
information. Questions pertaining to the relationships between two actions show a
preference for mid-term information, offering insights into the cause and effect of
actions. Intuitively, the mid-term focal length can provide more nuanced informa-
tion on the interactions between actions. This visualization affirms the effectiveness



                                            21
             What does the left team do before the         How many types of actions do the
               right team does tackle? (cross)                players perform? (three)
             BlindQA         cross         0.473          BlindQA          two        0.610
              MASN         long pass       0.850          MASN          three         0.924
              HQGA         long pass       0.988          HQGA             two        0.976
               IGV           cross         0.425           IGV             two        0.308
               AFT           cross         0.638           AFT          three         0.797

Fig. 6 Visualization of the predictions. The correct/wrong predictions are highlighted in green/red.
The predicted probability of each answer is also reported.



                              Question                                 3         9        80
     Which team wins a point in the video?                                                     0.7
     Which team scores in the video?
     Does any team score in the video?
     Does any team gain a point?
     What does the right team do before offensive rebound?
     Why does the right team do defensive rebound?
     What does the right team do before no offensive attack?
     What is the cause of the right team doing defensive rebound?
     How many players are performing gymnastics?
     How many players perform split?
     How many times does the right team do block?
     How many times does the right team do cross successfully?                                 0.1


Fig. 7 Visualization of focus weight. We show four examples of the highest weight for each focus.


of our model, which dynamically integrates different focus scales based on the diverse
temporal dependencies required by various questions.

6 Conclusion
We introduce Sports-QA, a novel dataset emphasizing professional action understand-
ing, interactions among multiple players, and fine-grained motion analysis for sports
VideoQA. Featuring multiple sports and diverse question types, the dataset offers a
comprehensive evaluation platform for VideoQA methods. Additionally, we propose
Auto-Focus Transformer (AFT), designed to capture various temporal dependencies.
Our extensive experiments on the dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of AFT.




                                                     22
7 Limitation and Future Work
Our proposed model does exhibit zero-shot generalization ability, precisely because
it is not pretrained on large-scale multimodal datasets—this absence of prior expo-
sure to such data is what underscores its capacity to generalize to unseen scenarios
without explicit training. That said, we recognize the value in further exploring the
nuances of this generalization capability, and we plan to delve deeper into this aspect
as part of our future work to provide more comprehensive insights. Additionally, we
convert answers into 191 categories in our dataset, which limits free-form generation
and semantic diversity. This formulation merely serves as a practical intermediate step
between rigid classification and fully free-form generation. We plan to explore evalua-
tion methods that capture open-ended responses, such as semantic similarity metrics
or hybrid protocols combining categorical and free-form assessments.

8 Ethical Consideration
In developing our Sports-QA dataset, sourced from MultiSports and FineGym, we
prioritized ethical considerations, adhering to data privacy and usage standards while
ensuring compliance with the terms of the original datasets. To address potential
biases, we actively promoted diversity in sports categories and specific sports actions,
aiming for a balanced representation. Mindful of the environmental impact, we opti-
mized our data processing to minimize resource consumption. Acknowledging the
potential for misuse, we emphasize the dataset’s intended use in positive sports ana-
lytics applications. Our commitment to transparency and reproducibility is evident in
our methodology and dataset accessibility, ensuring that our contribution to sports
analytics and computer vision is both responsible and beneficial.

List of Crucial Actions
The selected crucial actions are listed in Table 11.

Question Templates for Sports-QA
                                   Gymnastics
Descriptive Question
  •   What is the video about?
  •   How many SOME-ACTION do the players perform?
  •   How many types of SOME-ACTION do the players perform?
  •   How many times do the players perform SOME-ACTION?
  •   How many players perform the i-th SOME-ACTION?
  •   Do the players perform SOME-ACTION?

Temporal Question
  • Do the players perform SOME-ACTION before/after the i-th SOME-ACTION?


                                          23
                 Table 11 Crucial actions selected for Sports-QA,
                 which are classified into offensive actions and
                 defensive actions.

                                               Action
                 Sports
                              Offensive             Defensive
                              serve                 first pass
                              dink                  defend
                 Volleyball   spike                 protect
                              second attack         adjust
                              no offensive attack   save
                              shoot                 diving
                              cross                 tackle
                 Football     through pass          steal
                              long pass             block
                              aerial duels
                              jump ball             save
                              free throw            pass steal
                 Basketball   2-point shot          dribble steal
                              3-point shot          defensive rebound
                              offensive rebound



 • What do the players perform before/while/after performing the i-th SOME-
   ACTION?
 • How many times do the player do SOME-ACTION before/after doing the i-th
   SOME-ACTION?

                                  Ball Games
Descriptive Question
 •   What is the video about?
 •   Does one team score in the video?
 •   Which team scores in the video?
 •   How many times does SOME-TEAM do SOME-ACTION?
 •   How many times does SOME-TEAM do SOME-ACTION successfully?
 •   Does SOME-TEAM do their i-th SOME-ACTION successfully?

Temporal Question
 • What does SOME-TEAM do before/after their i-th SOME-ACTION?
 • What does SOME-TEAM do before/after the other team does their i-th SOME-
   ACTION?

Causal Question
 • Why does SOME-TEAM do the i-th SOME-ACTION?
 • What is the effect of the i-th SOME-ACTION of SOME-TEAM?
 • How does SOME-TEAM succeed in doing the i-th something?


                                          24
Counterfactual Question
  • Would SOME-TEAM succeed in doing the i-th SOME-ACTION if the other team
    did not do SOME-ACTION?

Acknowledgments
This research was particularly supported by the Australian Government through the
Australian Research Council’s DECRA funding scheme (Grant No.: DE250100030),
Discovery Project funding scheme (Grant No.: DP260100218, DP260101891), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62372491), and the Guangdong
Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2022B1515020103).

Declarations
Data and Code Availability
The proposed dataset, Sports-QA, and the code of the proposed method are available
at https://github.com/HopLee6/Sports-QA.

References
Antol, S., Agrawal, A., Lu, J., Mitchell, M., Batra, D., Zitnick, C.L., Parikh, D.: Vqa:
 Visual question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
 on Computer Vision, pp. 2425–2433 (2015)

Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang,
  S., Tang, J., et al.: Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923
  (2025)

Ben-Younes, H., Cadene, R., Thome, N., Cord, M.: Block: Bilinear superdiagonal
  fusion for visual question answering and visual relationship detection. In: Pro-
  ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 33, pp. 8102–8109
  (2019)

Choi, S., On, K.-W., Heo, Y.-J., Seo, A., Jang, Y., Lee, M., Zhang, B.-T.: Dramaqa:
  Character-centered video story understanding with hierarchical qa. In: Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, pp. 1166–1174 (2021)

Carreira, J., Zisserman, A.: Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinet-
  ics dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6299–6308 (2017)

Deliege, A., Cioppa, A., Giancola, S., Seikavandi, M.J., Dueholm, J.V., Nasrollahi, K.,
  Ghanem, B., Moeslund, T.B., Van Droogenbroeck, M.: Soccernet-v2: A dataset and
  benchmarks for holistic understanding of broadcast soccer videos. In: Proceedings



                                          25
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  4508–4519 (2021)

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
  rectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
  (2018)

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
  rectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (long and Short Papers), pp.
  4171–4186 (2019)

Fu, T.-J., Li, L., Gan, Z., Lin, K., Wang, W.Y., Wang, L., Liu, Z.: Violet: End-to-
  end video-language transformers with masked visual-token modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.12681 (2021)

Fan, C., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Wang, W., Zhang, C., Huang, H.: Heterogeneous
  memory enhanced multimodal attention model for video question answering. In:
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1999–2007 (2019)

Giancola, S., Amine, M., Dghaily, T., Ghanem, B.: Soccernet: A scalable dataset
  for action spotting in soccer videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1711–1721 (2018)

Gao, J., Ge, R., Chen, K., Nevatia, R.: Motion-appearance co-memory networks for
 video question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6576–6585 (2018)

Garcia, N., Otani, M., Chu, C., Nakashima, Y.: Knowit vqa: Answering knowledge-
 based questions about videos. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 10826–10834 (2020)

He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Mask r-cnn. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2961–2969 (2017)

He, P., Liu, X., Gao, J., Chen, W.: Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert with disentangled
  attention. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2021)

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In:
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778 (2016)

Jiang, P., Han, Y.: Reasoning with heterogeneous graph alignment for video question
  answering. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol.
  34, pp. 11109–11116 (2020)


                                          26
Jang, Y., Song, Y., Yu, Y., Kim, Y., Kim, G.: Tgif-qa: Toward spatio-temporal rea-
  soning in visual question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2758–2766 (2017)

Jin, P., Takanobu, R., Zhang, W., Cao, X., Yuan, L.: Chat-univi: Unified visual rep-
  resentation empowers large language models with image and video understanding.
  In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 13700–13710 (2024)

Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)

Koshkina, M., Pidaparthy, H., Elder, J.H.: Contrastive learning for sports video:
 Unsupervised player classification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4528–4536 (2021)

Li, Y., Chen, L., He, R., Wang, Z., Wu, G., Wang, L.: Multisports: A multi-person
  video dataset of spatio-temporally localized sports actions. In: Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13536–13545 (2021)

Li, S., Cao, Q., Liu, L., Yang, K., Liu, S., Hou, J., Yi, S.: Groupformer: Group activ-
  ity recognition with clustered spatial-temporal transformer. In: Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13668–13677 (2021)

Liu, Y., Li, G., Lin, L.: Cross-modal causal relational reasoning for event-level visual
  question answering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
  gence 45(10), 11624–11641 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3284038

Lin, T.-Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Dollár, P.,
  Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In: European Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 740–755 (2014). Springer

Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettle-
  moyer, L., Stoyanov, V.: Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019)

Lu, W.-L., Ting, J.-A., Little, J.J., Murphy, K.P.: Learning to track and iden-
  tify players from broadcast sports videos. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence 35(7), 1704–1716 (2013) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.
  2012.242

Liu, Y., Wang, L., Wang, Y., Ma, X., Qiao, Y.: Fineaction: A fine-grained video
  dataset for temporal action localization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
  31, 6937–6950 (2022)

Li, Y., Wang, X., Xiao, J., Ji, W., Chua, T.-S.: Invariant grounding for video question
  answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and


                                          27
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 2928–2937 (2022)

Li, Y., Wang, X., Xiao, J., Ji, W., Chua, T.-S.: Transformer-empowered invariant
  grounding for video question answering. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 1–12 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3303451

Martin, P.-E., Benois-Pineau, J., Péteri, R., Morlier, J.: Fine grained sport action
 recognition with twin spatio-temporal convolutional neural networks. Multimedia
 Tools and Applications 79(27), 20429–20447 (2020)

Parmar, P., Morris, B.: Action quality assessment across multiple actions. In: 2019
  IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1468–
  1476 (2019). IEEE

Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.D.: Glove: Global vectors for word represen-
  tation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543 (2014)

Rasmussen, T.E., Clemmensen, L.H., Baum, A.: Compressing cnn kernels for videos
  using tucker decompositions: Towards lightweight cnn applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.07033 (2022)

Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J.: Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection
  with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing systems
  28 (2015)

Seo, A., Kang, G.-C., Park, J., Zhang, B.-T.: Attend what you need: Motion-
  appearance synergistic networks for video question answering. In: Proceedings of
  the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 6167–6177 (2021)

Sun, S., Wang, F., Liang, Q., He, L.: Taichi: A fine-grained action recognition dataset.
  In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on International Conference on Multimedia
  Retrieval, pp. 429–433 (2017)

Shao, D., Zhao, Y., Dai, B., Lin, D.: Finegym: A hierarchical video dataset for fine-
  grained action understanding. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR) (2020)

Tang, Y., Ni, Z., Zhou, J., Zhang, D., Lu, J., Wu, Y., Zhou, J.: Uncertainty-aware
  score distribution learning for action quality assessment. In: Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9839–
  9848 (2020)

Tapaswi, M., Zhu, Y., Stiefelhagen, R., Torralba, A., Urtasun, R., Fidler, S.: Movieqa:
  Understanding stories in movies through question-answering. In: Proceedings of


                                          28
  the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4631–4640
  (2016)

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.,
  Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems 30 (2017)

Wang, A.J., Ge, Y., Yan, R., Ge, Y., Lin, X., Cai, G., Wu, J., Shan, Y., Qie, X.,
 Shou, M.Z.: All in one: Exploring unified video-language pre-training. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2203.07303 (2022)

Wang, W.-Y., Shuai, H.-H., Chang, K.-S., Peng, W.-C.: Shuttlenet: Position-aware
 fusion of rally progress and player styles for stroke forecasting in badminton. In:
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, pp. 4219–4227
 (2022)

Wiseman, S., Shieber, S.M., Rush, A.M.: Challenges in data-to-document generation.
 In: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 2253–2263 (2017)

Xiao, J., Shang, X., Yao, A., Chua, T.-S.: Next-qa: Next phase of question-answering
  to explaining temporal actions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9777–9786 (2021)

Xiao, J., Yao, A., Liu, Z., Li, Y., Ji, W., Chua, T.-S.: Video as conditional graph
  hierarchy for multi-granular question answering. (2022). AAAI

Xia, H., Yang, Z., Wang, Y., Tracy, R., Zhao, Y., Huang, D., Chen, Z., Zhu, Y., Wang,
  Y.-f., Shen, W.: Sportqa: A benchmark for sports understanding in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15862 (2024)

Xia, H., Yang, Z., Zou, J., Tracy, R., Wang, Y., Lu, C., Lai, C., He, Y., Shao, X., Xie,
  Z., et al.: Sportu: A comprehensive sports understanding benchmark for multimodal
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08474 (2024)

Xu, D., Zhao, Z., Xiao, J., Wu, F., Zhang, H., He, X., Zhuang, Y.: Video question
 answering via gradually refined attention over appearance and motion. In: Pro-
 ceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 1645–1653
 (2017)

Xiao, J., Zhou, P., Yao, A., Li, Y., Hong, R., Yan, S., Chua, T.-S.: Contrastive video
  question answering via video graph transformer. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence 45(11), 13265–13280 (2023) https://doi.org/10.
  1109/TPAMI.2023.3292266

Yang, A., Miech, A., Sivic, J., Laptev, I., Schmid, C.: Just ask: Learning to answer
  questions from millions of narrated videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF


                                          29
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1686–1697 (2021)

Yang, A., Miech, A., Sivic, J., Laptev, I., Schmid, C.: Learning to answer visual
  questions from web videos. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 1–1 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3173208

Yuan, H., Ni, D., Wang, M.: Spatio-temporal dynamic inference network for group
  activity recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 7476–7485 (2021)

Yang, Z., Xia, H., Li, J., Chen, Z., Zhu, Z., Shen, W.: Sports intelligence: Assessing the
  sports understanding capabilities of language models through question answering
  from text to video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14877 (2024)

Yu, Z., Xu, D., Yu, J., Yu, T., Zhao, Z., Zhuang, Y., Tao, D.: Activitynet-qa: A dataset
  for understanding complex web videos via question answering. In: Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 33, pp. 9127–9134 (2019)

Zadeh, A., Chan, M., Liang, P.P., Tong, E., Morency, L.-P.: Social-iq: A ques-
  tion answering benchmark for artificial social intelligence. In: Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8807–8817 (2019)

Zhu, D., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, X., Elhoseiny, M.: Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-
  language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592 (2023)

Zellers, R., Lu, X., Hessel, J., Yu, Y., Park, J.S., Cao, J., Farhadi, A., Choi, Y.: Mer-
  lot: Multimodal neural script knowledge models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 34, 23634–23651 (2021)

Zhu, B., Lin, B., Ning, M., Yan, Y., Cui, J., Wang, H., Pang, Y., Jiang, W., Zhang,
  J., Li, Z., et al.: Languagebind: Extending video-language pretraining to n-modality
  by language-based semantic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01852 (2023)

Zhang, Y., Wu, J., Li, W., Li, B., Ma, Z., Liu, Z., Li, C.: Video instruction tuning
  with synthetic data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02713 (2024)

Zhu, K., Wong, A., McPhee, J.: Fencenet: Fine-grained footwork recognition in fencing.
  In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 3589–3598 (2022)

Zhang, X., Zhang, F., Xu, C.: Next-ood: Overcoming dual multiple-choice vqa biases.
  IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 1–18 (2023) https:
  //doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3269429




                                           30
